>> Sreenivasan: CONGRESS RAMPS
UP A NEFIGHW T, AMID MOUNTING
CRITICISM OF THE PROBLEMS
PLAGUING healthcare.gov, THE
WEBSITE FOR THE FEDERAL
INSURANCE MARKETPLACE.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GWEN IFILL AND JUDY WOODRUFF ARE
OFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY, AS
THE BANKRUPTCY TRIAL BEGINS IN
DETROIT.
JEFFREY BROWN CONTINUES HIS
TRAVELS WITH POET LAUREATE
NATASHA TRETHEWEY.
>> POETRY LIVES ON YOUR
DOORSTEP, LIKE A BABY IN A
BASKET WAITING FOR A NEW FAMILY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND VISITS A
MOTOR CITY SCHOOL WHERE POETRY
LIVES.
>> THIS POETRY REALLY GETS THEM
TRULY MOTIVATED AND EXCITED.
AND I'M TALKING ABOUT MY
FOOTBALL PLAYERS, MY ATHLETES,
MY BASKETBALL PLAYERS WANT
POETRY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FROM THE
PACIFIC NORTHWEST, A REPORT ON
HOW CLIMATE CHANGE COULD BE
MAKING THE LOCAL SHELLFISH
TOXIC.
>> THEY JUST WERE SO VIOLENTLY
ILL.
I JUST KNEW IT HAD TO BE THE
MUSSELS.
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE ARE JUST
SOME OF THE STORIES WE'RE
COVERING ON TONIGHT'S "PBS
NEWSHOUR."
>> Sreenivasan: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGH
THE PROBLEMS IMPLEMENTING THE
NEW HEALTH CARE LAW WERE FRONT
AND CENTER IN WASHINGTON.
BOTH SIDES SCRAMBLED TO ADDRESS
THE FAILURES AND THE POSSIBLE
FIXES.
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> THE ROLLOUT OF OBAMACARE IS
NOTHING SHORT OF A DEBACLE, AND
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE NOW
FEARFUL OF THEIR HEALTHCARE.
>> Reporter: THE HOUSE RETURNED
TO WORK FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE
THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENDED,
AND REPUBLICANS QUICKLY TURNED
TO THE BALKY WEBSITE WHERE
UNINSURED AMERICANS ARE SUPPOSED
TO ENROLL FOR HEALTH INSURANCE.
G.O.P. LEADERS POSTED THIS VIDEO
REENACTMENT OF A NEW JERSEY
MAN'S EXPERIENCE WITH THE SITE.
>> YOU HAVE NO WAY TO ASSIST
THOSE WHO ASK FOR HELP?
DON'T RUN WITH SCISSORS.
>> WHY IS THERE EVEN A CHAT
OPTION ON THE PAGE IF YOU CAN'T
LOOK UP AN APPLICATION AND
ASSIST?
>> Reporter: MAJORITY LEADER
ERIC CANTOR SAID THE PROBLEMS
ARE SO BAD, THE ADMINISTRATION
SHOULD DELAY THE PENALTY FOR
THOSE WHO DON'T GET INSURANCE.
>> WITH SO MANY UNANSWERED
QUESTIONS AND THE PROBLEMS
ARISING AROUND THIS ROLLOUT, IT
DOESN'T MAKE ANY SENSE TO IMPOSE
THIS 1% MANDATE TAX ON THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER PROMISED THERE WILL BE
INVESTIGATIONS WITH ONE HEARING
ALREADY SET FOR TOMORROW.
>> I THINK THE BIGGEST PART OF
CONGRESS' JOB IS TO PROVIDE
PROPER OVERSIGHT OF THE
EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT,
AND WHETHER IT'S OBAMACARE OR
ISSUES OVER AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE, IT'S OUR JOB TO HOLD
THEM ACCOUNTABLE.
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER HAND,
DEMOCRATS INCLUDING MINORITY
LEADER NANCY PELOSI SAID THE
PRIORITY SHOULD BE GETTING THE
SYSTEM UP AND RUNNING.
>> WELL, THERE CERTAINLY IS
ACCOUNTABILITY INTERNALLY IN
TERMS OF WHAT DECISIONS WERE
MADE WHEN ON ALL OF THIS.
BUT I THINK THAT OUR FOCUS AND
ENERGY SHOULD BESED  UTO FIX IT
BECAUSE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE
DEPENDING ON IT.
>> Reporter: WHILE PARTY LEADERS
HERE AT THE CAPITOL JOUSTED OVER
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION RAMPED
UP EFFORTS TO FIX IT.
ON C.N.N. LAST NIGHT, SECRETARY
KATHLEEN SEBELIUS SAID PRESIDENT
OBAMA WAS UNAWARE OF THE EXTENT
OF THE PROBLEMS BEFORE THE
WEBSITE PREMIERED.
>> NO ONE COULD BE MORE
FRUSTRATED THAN I AM AND THE
PRESIDENT THAT THIS ISN'T
SMOOTH.
PEOPLE ARE SIGNING UP EVERY DAY,
>> THE PRESIDENT DID SAY THAT HE
WAS ANGRY ABOUT THIS.
I MEAN DO YOU KNOW WHEN HE FIRST
KNEW THAT THERE WAS A PROBLEM?
>> WELL, I THINK IT BECAME CLEAR
FAIRLY EARLY ON.
THE FIRST COUPLE OF DAYS,
THAT...
>> SO NOT BEFORE THAT, THOUGH?
NOT BEFORE OCTOBER 1ST?
>> NO, SIR.
>> Reporter: THE ADMINISTRATION
ALSO HAS LAUNCHED A KIND OF
"FIX-IT" SURGE TO BE OVERSEEN BY
JEFFREY ZIENTS, FORMER HEAD OF
THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET.
AND, OFFICIALS HAVE SET UP CALL
CENTERS, AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR THE
WEBSITE.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE PRESIDENT
IS URGING SUPPORTERS NOT TO
DESPAIR.
>> WE'VE GOT PEOPLE WORKING
OVERTIME IN A TECH SURGE TO
BOOST CAPACITY AND ADDRESS THE
PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: ALSO TODAY, "THE
WASHINGTON POST" REPORTED SOME
OF THE NON-PROFIT HEALTH
INSURANCE CO-OPS CREATED TO
FOSTER COMPETITION ARE
STRUGGLING TO SURVIVE.
AND STARTING TOMORROW, THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES BEGINS A NEW EFFORT TO
TRY TO ADDRESS PROBLEMS QUICKLY
BY GIVING DAILY BRIEFINGS ON
THEIR ACTIVITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
ON THIS, AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
COMPLAINED DIRECTLY TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA TODAY, OVER REPORTS OF
U.S. SPYING ON HER
CONVERSATIONS.
SHE TELEPHONED THE PRESIDENT
AFTER LEARNING THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY MAY HAVE
MONITORED HER CELL PHONE.
A SPOKESMAN CALLED IT COMPLETELY
UNACCEPTABLE.
AT THE WHITE HOUSE, PRESS
SECRETARY JAY CARNEY DID NOT
DIRECTLY DENY THAT THE U.S.
CAPTURED MERKEL'S CALLS IN THE
PAST.
INSTEAD, HE SAID:
>> I CAN TELL YOU THAT THE
PRESIDENT ASSURED THE CHANCELLOR
THAT THE UNITED STATES IS NOT
MONITORING AND WILL NOT MONITOR
THE COMMUNICATIONS OF THE
CHANCELLOR.
THE UNITED STATES GREATLY VALUES
OUR CLOSE COOPERATION WITH
GERMANY ON A BROAD RANGE OF
SHARED SECURITY CHALLENGES.
MERKEL IS THE LATEST IN A STRING
OF FOREIGN LEADERS TO COMPLAIN
ABOUT N.S.A. INTERCEPTS OF PHONE
CALLS AND E-MAILS.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO SPOKE TODAY
WITH THE PRIME MINISTER OF
PAKISTAN IN PERSON, AT THE WHITE
HOUSE.
IT WAS THE LATEST EFFORT TO
IMPROVE STRAINED RELATIONS.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
HAS THAT STORY.
>> WE ARE VERY GLAD TO BE ABLE
TO PARTNER WITH THE PEOPLE OF
PAKISTAN AND THE PAKISTANI
GOVERNMENT
>> Reporter: IN THE OVAL OFFICE
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA AND PRIME
MINISTER NAWAZ SHARIF TOOK PAINS
TO EMPHASIZE THEIR DESIRE TO
TURN AROUND THE ROCKY
RELATIONSHIP OF RECENT YEARS.
>> THE UNITED STATES CONSIDERS
PAKISTAN TO BE A VERY IMPORTANT
STRATEGIC PARTNER.
WE BELIEVE THAT IF PAKISTAN IS
SECURE AND PEACEFUL AND
PROSPEROUS, THAT'S NOT ONLIED
ANY FOR PAKISTAN, IT'S GOOD FOR
THE REGION, AND IT'S GOOD FOR
THE WORLD.
>> WE ALSO DISCUSSED A COMMON
VISION TO BUILD A ROBUST,
BILATERAL COOPERATION, A
BROAD-BASED STABLE AND ENDURING
PARTNERSHIP FOUNDED ON THE
PRINCIPLES OF MUTUAL RESPECT.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE IS A LONG
WAY TO GO.
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES HIT A NADIR TWO AND A
HALF YEARS AGO.
IN EARLY 2011, PAKISTANI
PROTESTERS TOOK TO THE STREETS
AFTER A C.I.A. OPERATIVE SHOT
AND KILLED TWO MEN IN LAHORE.
THEN, IN MAY, U.S. NAVY SEALS
STORMED A COMPOUND IN
ABBOTTABAD, KILLING OSAMA BIN
LADEN.
ALSO THAT YEAR, U.S. TROOPS IN
AFGHANISTAN MISTAKENLY KILLED
PAKISTANI SOLDIERS IN A BORDER
INCIDENT.
FOR A TIME, PAKISTAN HALTED NATO
SUPPLY CONVOYS THROUGH THE
KHYBER PASS.
NOW, THE PENTAGON HOPES TO USE
THOSE ROUTES IN WITHDRAWING FROM
AFGHANISTAN NEXT YEAR.
IT'S AGAINST THAT BACKDROP THAT
NEWLY ELECTED PRIME MINISTER
SHARIF, WHO'S HELD THAT POST
TWICE BEFORE, RETURNED TO THE
WHITE HOUSE FOR THE FIRST TIME
IN 14 YEARS.
BOTH COUNTRIES HAVE AN INCENTIVE
TO RESTORE RELATIONS.
THE U.S. WANTS PAKISTAN'S HELP
IN NEGOTIATING AN END TO THE
AFGHAN CONFLICT.
THE PAKISTANIS NEED AID.
BUT THE U.S. IS FRUSTRATED THAT
TALIBAN-AFFILIATED GROUPS STILL
USE WESTERN PAKISTAN AS A BASE
TO HIT U.S. AND AFGHAN FORCES IN
AFGHANISTAN.
JUST YESTERDAY, HUMAN RIGHTS
GROUPS REPORTED U.S. DRONE
STRIKES IN THAT REGION HAVE
KILLED DOZENS OF CIVILIANS.
AND SHARIF DENOUNCED THE U.S.
DRONE ATTACKS.
>> I USELESS BROUGHT UP THE
ISSUE OF DRONES IN OUR MEETING,
EMPHASIZING THE NEED FOR AN END
TO SUCH STRIKES.
>> Reporter: BEFORE TODAY'S
VISIT, U.S. OFFICIALS SIGNALED
THEY WOULD UNFREEZE
$1.6 BILLION IN MILITARY AND
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE AID TO
PAKISTAN, SUSPENDED TWO YEARS
AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: IN IRAQ, AT
LEAST 16 PEOPLE DIED IN A NEW
WAVE OF BOMBINGS AND SHOOTINGS
IN AND AROUND BAGHDAD TODAY.
DOZENS MORE WERE WOUNDED.
THAT FOLLOWED OVERNIGHT ATTACKS
ON POLICE IN ANBAR PROVINCE THAT
KILLED 19 IRAQIS.
THE VIOLENCE HAS SURGED SINCE
APRIL, WITH AT LEAST 45PEOP0 LE
KILLED THIS MONTH ALONE.
POPE FRANCIS HAS TEMPORARILY
BANISHED A GERMAN BISHOP FROM
HIS ROMAN CATHOLIC DIOCESE FOR
SPENDING $43 MILLION ON A NEW
RESIDENCE.
THE VATICAN SAID TODAY THAT
BISHOP FRANZ-PETER TEBARTZ-VAN
ELST OF LIMBURG WAS ORDERED TO
LEAVE, PENDING AN INVESTIGATION.
THE BISHOP HAS DEFENDED THE
EXPENDITURES, BUT THEY'VE
PROVOKED AN OUTCRY IN GERMANY.
THE FUTURE MONARCH OF BRITAIN--
PRINCE GEORGE-- WAS CHRISTENED
TODAY.
THE ROYAL FAMILY MARKED THE
OCCASION AT A SMALL CEREMONY IN
LONDON.
WE HAVE A REPORT FROM TIM EWART
OF "INDEPENDENT TELEVISION
NEWS."
>> Reporter: HE WAS BRIEFLY IN
THE BACKGROUND BUT NOT FOR LONG.
GEORGE ALEXANDER LOUIS, PRINCE
OF CAMBRIDGE AND THIRD IN LINE
TO THE THRONE IS NOW THREE
MONTHS OLD AND CLEARLY GROWING
FAST.
THERE WAS A LITTLE HELP FROM HIS
FATHER WITH THE ROYAL WAVE BUT
AS HE ARRIVED FOR HIS
CHRISTENING, IT IS APPARENT
THERE IS NOW ANOTHER ROYAL THE
CAMERAS WILL LOVE.
THIS WAS THE START OF WHAT WILL
BE A VERY PUBLIC LIFE.
IT WAS IN FACT A VERY PRIVATE
SERVICE.
THE QUEEN AND PRINCE PHILIP WERE
DRIVEN INTO ST. JAMES PALACE,
THE BRIEFEST GLIMPSE OF ROYALTY
FOR PEOPLE WHO'D GATHERED
OUTSIDE, A FEW CAMPING
OVERNIGHT.
THE QUEEN AND THE DUKE OF
EDINBURGH HEADED A SMALL ROYAL
CONTINGENT WITH CHARLES AND
CAMILLA AND PRINCE HARRY, LOW-
KEY WAS THE ORDER OF THE DAY.
THIS CHRISTENING IS ANOTHER SIGN
OF THE WAY THINGS ARE CHANGING
WITHIN THE ROYAL FAMILY.
WILLIAM AND KATE ARE QUITE HAPPY
TO BREAK WITH TRADITION AND TO
DO THINGS THEIR WAY.
THERE WERE JUST 22 GUESTS FOR A
SERVICE CONDUCTED BY THE
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY AND THE
BISHOP OF LONDON.
OF THE SEVEN GODPARENTS ONLY ONE
WAS FROM THE ROYAL FAMILY,
PRINCESS ANNE'S DAUGHTER ZARA,
HERSELF EXPECTING A BABY.
PRINCE GEORGE OF COURSE IS
BLISSFULLY UNAWARE OF THE
RELENTLESS ATTENTION FROM WHICH
HIS PARENTS HOPE TO SHIELD HIM.
CHRISTENING OVER, IT WAS TIME
FOR TEA.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S WORD
THAT FEWER PEOPLE DIED FROM
TUBERCULOSIS IN 2012.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
REPORTED 1.3 MILLION DEATHS,
DOWN 100,000 FROM THE YEAR
BEFORE.
BUT, THE W.H.O. WARNED THERE'S A
GROWING RISK FROM DRUG-RESISTANT
STRAINS OF T.B., AND FROM PEOPLE
NOT GETTING ADEQUATE TREATMENT.
OF ALL INFECTIOUS DISEASES, ONLY
H.I.V. KILLS MORE PEOPLE THAN
T.B.
THE CITY OF DETROIT BEGAN
PRESENTING EVIDENCE IN COURT
TODAY TO PROVE IT IS ACTUALLY
BANKRUPT.
DETROIT FILED FOR CHAPTER 9
BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION THIS
SUMMER, BUT UNIONS AND PENSION
FUNDS SAID THE CITY ACTED
PREMATURELY.
THEY WANT A FEDERAL BANKRUPTCY
COURT TO REJECT THE FILING.
WE'LL HEAR MORE ON TODAY'S
ARGUMENTS, LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE LOST 54
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 15,413.
THE NASDAQ FELL 22 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,907.
ENERGY STOCKS WERE HARD HIT AS
OIL PRICES SLID BELOW $97 A
BARREL, THE LOWEST IN FOUR
MONTHS.
STILL AHEAD ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
CHALLENGES OF FIXING
healthcare.gov; THE SOARING COST
OF HIGHER EDUCATION; THE FIGHT
OVER DETROIT'S BANKRUPTCY GOES
TO COURT; KIDS IN THE MOTOR CITY
FIND A VOICE THROUGH POETRY;
TOXIC SHELLFISH IN SOME
NORTHWEST COASTAL AREAS AND
PSALMS FIT FOR A PRESIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, A
TECHNOLOGY FOCUSED TAKE ON THE
TROUBLED LAUNCH OF THE HEALTH
INSURANCE EXCHANGES.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
CONCEDED TODAY IT DID NOT
ADEQUATELY TEST THE WEBSITE
BEFOREHAND.
IT ANNOUNCED NEW TESTS ARE
UNDERWAY.
WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS ALSO SAID
OTHER CHANGES ARE BEING MADE TO
THE SITE'S BASIC ARCHITECTURE.
WE LOOK AT THOSE POSSIBLE FIXES
AND WHAT HAS GONE WRONG WITH,
TWO SOFTWARE EXPERTS WHO HAVE
BEEN LOOKING AT THE PROBLEM.
JOHN ENGATES, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY
OFFICER AT RACKSPACE, A CLOUD
COMPUTER SERVICE COMPANY.
AND BILL CURTIS OF CAST
SOFTWARE.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BILL, I WANT TO START WITH YOU.
YOU'VE SEEN A LITTLE BIT OF WHAT
THE ADMINISTRATION SAYS THEY'RE
DOING.
IN PLAIN ENGLISH, IS THIS THE
RIGHT DIRECTION?
WICTION, AND
THEY'VE GOT AN AWFUL LOT OF
MONEY TO FIX THINGS BUT THERE'S
AN AWFUL LOT OF FIXES AHEAD OF
THEM.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE QUITE A LOT
OF TIME TO FIX THE ENTIRE
SYSTEM.
IT'S NOT JUST A WEB INTERFACE
PROBLEM.
THERE ARE A LOT OF PROBLEMS
WE'RE SEEING BEHIND THE WEB.
>> EARLY ON THERE WAS THIS
ANALYSIS THAT IT SHOULD BE EASY
TO COMPARE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
PLANS AS GOING ONLINE AND
COMPARING PRICES FOR AIRLINE
TICKETS AND I THINK CRITICS
SEIZED ON THAT.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THIS WEB SITE AND WHAT WE'RE
USED TO SEEING AND DOING ONLINE?
>> WHAT THE DIFFERENCE IS THAT
WHEN YOU GO ONLINE TO A WEB SITE
LIKE AMAZON OR YOUR AIRLINE, THE
DATA BEHIND THOSE WEB SITES IS
COMPLETELY UNDER THE CONTROL OF
THAT ONE COMPANY OR THAT'S
ENTITY.
IN THIS CASE, YOU HAVE A MASSIVE
INTEGRATION PROJECT THAT SPANS
ACROSS NUMEROUS STATES.
THERE ARE 30-PLUS STATES, PLUS
MULTIPLE FEDERAL AGENCIES, AND,
THEREFORE, YOU'VE GOT DATA
SPREAD ALL OVER THE PLACE.
AND YOU HAVE TO PULL ALL THAT
DATA TOGETHER TO ACTUALLY
EXECUTE ONE OF THESE
TRANSACTIONS TO GET SOMEBODY
SIGNED UP.
>> Sreenivasan: BILL CURTIS,
THERE IS A LEAK OF CONGRESSIONAL
TESTIMONY PLANNED FOR TOMORROW
AND YOU ALREADY SEE THE BASIS OF
FINGER POINTING FROM ONE
CONTRACTOR TO ANOTHER.
WHAT IS THE CHALLENGES OF
PULLING TOGETHER 55 DIFFERENT
CONTRACTORS AND WAS THE H.H.S IS
IN A GOOD POSITION TO LEAD THEM
AND PULL THEM ALL TOGETHER?
>> THE CHALLENGES ARE ENORMOUS,
ALL THE COORDINATION.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE ENOUGH TIME TO
MAKE IT ALL EXPHAP GET IT TESTED
ADEQUATELY.
THEY BASICALLY LET THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE DO THE TESTING.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE THE TIME TO
PULL OFF A SYSTEM THIS BIG AND
COMPLEX.
IT'S WRONG TO SAY IT'S A SYSTEM.
IT'S A SUFFICIENCY SYSTEMS.
WE'RE TRYING TO INTEGRATE AN
AWFUL LOT OF SYSTEMS, AS YOU
JUST HEARD, FROM A NUMBER OF
DIFFERENT SOURCES AND IT'S A
HUGE IMPLEMENTATION PROBLEM.
IN MANY CASES THE GOVERNMENT
DOESN'T HAVE PEOPLE USED TO
MANAGING THAT LEVEL OF
COMPLEXITY.
>> Sreenivasan: BILL CURTIS,
STAYING WITH YOU FOR A SECOND,
IF THE USERS-- THAT IS ALL THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC THAT HAS TRIED
TO LOG ON-- HAVE BEEN THE USER
TESTERS HAVE, THEY BROKEN
EVERYTHING THAT COULD BE BROKEN
AND IS IT THAT MEAN THE WORST IS
OVER AND WE COULD HAVE MORE
INFORMATION TO FIX IT?
>> NO, THEY'VE JUST BROKEN THE
PROBLEMS AT THE WEB INTERFACE.
ANY TIME THERE IS A SYSTEM THIS
BIG, ONCE YOU FIX SOME PROBLEMS
IT OPPOSE UP A WHOLE NEW WAVE
THE PROBLEMS THAT SIT BEHIND IT.
WE'LL SEE MORE PROBLEMS WITH
DATA INTEGRATION, COORDINATION
PROBLEMS AMONG ALL THESE
DIFFERENT SYSTEMS AND WE'RE JUST
NOW STARTING TO GET INTO THAT
PART SYSTEM.
>> Sreenivasan: JAWRNG HOW
MUCH OF THIS IS TRYING PUT
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT INTO A
POLITICAL TIMELINE?
THERE'S AN OCTOBER 1 DEADLINE.
THERE'S A DECEMBER 15 DEADLINE.
A MARCH 15 DEADLINE, THAT ARE
VERY IMPORTANT FOR THE AMERICAN
PUBLIC BUT THAT'S NOT
NECESSARILY HOW SOFTWARE
DEVELOPMENT WORKS.
>> RIGHT.
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT IS A
COMPLICATED PROCESS.
IT'S HARD TO ACCELERATE THAT
PROCESS BY THROWING BODIES AT
THE PROBLEM.
OFTENTIMES, THAT CAN ACTUALLY
SLOW THINGS DOWN.
SO IT'S A DIFFICULT CHALLENGE TO
MEET SOMEBODY ELSE'S TIMELINE,
ESPECIALLY IF YOU HAVE CHANGING
REQUIREMENTS ALONG THE WAY.
AND I UNDERSTAND THAT SOME OF
THOSE REQUIREMENTS WERE
CHANGING.
IN FACT, ONE OF THE REQUIREMENTS
CHANGED RIGHT UP NEAR THE
LAUNCH, WHICH IS BASICALLY
CHANGING FROM ALLOWING USERS TO
BROWSE THE CHOICES WITHOUT
ACTUALLY GOING THROUGH THE
TRANSACTION PROCESS, TO ACTUALLY
REQUIRING THEM TO GO THROUGH
THAT SIGN-UP PROCESS FIRST,
BEFORE THEY ARE ABLE TO BROWSE.
AND I THINK THAT ONE CHANGE
RIGHT THERE COULD HAVE ACTUALLY
SAVED A GREAT DEAL OF LOAD AND
STRAIN ON THE SYSTEM, AND IF
THAT CHANGED REALLY SOON, RIGHT
BEFORE THE LAUNCH, THAT COULD
HAVE BEEN A MAJOR CHALLENGE FOR
THE CONTRACTORS INVOLVED TO
REALLY MEET THAT REQUIREMENT IN
THAT SHORT TIME FRAME.
>> Sreenivasan: "TH SO BILL
CURTIS, WHAT ABOUT BEING HELD
OFF UNTIL AN ELECTION, THE RIGHT
KIND REQUIREMENTS NOT COMING
INTO PLAY BUT HAVING THE END
GOAL STILL BEING THE SAME POINT,
REGARDLESS, AND ALL THE SOFTWARE
ENGINEERS HAVING TO PERFORM THAT
TASK?
>> WELL, JUST AS YOU JUST HEARD,
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO GET A--
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO GET A BABY
IN ONE MONTH USING 9 WOMEN.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE A FULL NINE
MONTHS.
AND THAT'S THE PROBLEM.
THEY TRIED TO DO IT TOO FAST.
MY GUESS IS THEY WERE WELL AWARE
OF MANY OF THESE TECHNICAL
PROBLEMS.
THEY WERE HEARING ABOUT THEM
FROM THE G.A.O. AND THE
INSURANCE INDUSTRY, AND THIS WAS
A POLITICAL PLIL DECISION TO
KEEP DRIVING AGAINST THIS LINE
TO GET SOMETHING IN PLACE SO
THEY HAD A FAIT ACCOMPLI.
IT'S THERE.
PEOPLE WERE USING IT.
IT'S HARD TO BACK UP.
AND THEY'RE WILLING TO PAY THE
COST, ASK IT'S GOING TO BE
EXORBITANT TO GET ALL OF THIS
FIXED AND WORKING OVER THE NEXT
SOME PERIOD OF MONTHS.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW LONG IT WILL
TAKE TO GET IT PULLED TOGETHER
GLART ADMINISTRATION HAS
ASSIGNED A POINT PERSON, CALLING
IN FROM THE SILICON VALLEY.
THERE'S A SOFTWARE PRINCIPLE
CALLED BROOK'S LAW THAT STAYS
ADDING MORE PEOPLE DOESN'T
NECESSARILY MAKE THINGS FASTER.
ARE THEY LIKELY TO COMPLICATE
THEMSELVES OR CAN WE ACTUALLY
MEET THESE DECEMBER 15 AND MARCH
15 DEADLINES?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, THERE IS THAT
SAYING ABOUT TOO MANY COOKS IN
THE KITCHEN, AND I THINK YOU
HAVE POTENTIAL FOR THAT HERE.
SO WHAT PROBABLY NEEDS TO HAPPEN
IS THE ORIGINAL CONTRACTORS NEED
TO SORT OF TAKE A BACKSEAT AND
LET THE NEW FOLKS IN ON THE
SYSTEM.
THE ONLY CHALLENGE THERE IS THE
NEW FOLKS DON'T HAVE REALLY THE
HISTORY WITH THE SYSTEM.
SO IT'S VERY CHALLENGING TO, AT
THE LAST MINUTE OR UNDER
PRESSURE, BRING IN A DIFFERENT
TEAM AND HAVE THAT TEAM GET UP
TO SPEED VERY QUICKLY.
YOU KNOW, MOST OF THE TIME WHAT
YOU WANT TO DO IS SORT OF PUT--
PUT AWE STOP TO THE BLEEDING TO
SOME EXTENT, GO BACK TO THE
DRAWING BOARD IN SOME WAY, AND
YOU KNOW REALLY TAKE A BREATHER
AND FIGURE OUT WHAT THE RIGHT
APPROACH IS.
IT'S HARD TO DO THAT UNDER
EXTREME PRESSURE AND I'M SURE
THEY'RE FEELING THE PRESSURE
TODAY DISPLAR BILL CURTIS DO YOU
THINK THE GOVERNMENT IS BEING
TRANSPLANT ENOUGH IN WHAT THEIR
PLANS ARE, WHAT THEY'RE DOING,
AND MAYBE WHAT THEY'VE DONE SO
FAR?
>> PROBABLY NOT.
IT'S HARD UNDER THESE
CIRCUMSTANCES TO OPEN THE FULL
KIMONA, YOU SEE THIS IN
GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY.
IT'S HARD TO ADMIT ALL THE
PROBLEMS YOU WANT TO SOLVE.
YOU WANT TO GIVE PEOPLE HOPE AND
YOU WANT TO HIDE SOME OF THE
PROBLEMS BEHIND THE SCENES.
WE'VE ANALYZED SOME OF THE CODE,
AND SEEN WHILE THERE WERE SOME
FIXES WE'VE CREATED NEW
PROBLEMS, SOME OF WHICH INVOLVED
SECURITY.
THIS IS A LONG PROCESS.
AND AS YOU JUST HEARD, THERE ARE
GOING TO BE SOME REARCHITECTING
THAT HAS TO HAPPEN TO MAKE ALL
OF THIS HOOK TOGETHER.
>> Sreenivasan: JOHN ENGATES,
ARE YOU OPTIMISTIC WE WILL SEE
AWE SOLUTION OR JUST A SERIES OF
PROBLEMS EMERGE?
>> I THINK EVENTUALLY TWILL GET
FIXED.
I THINK THE CHALLENGE IS IN WHAT
TIME FRAME.
THERE'S NO CERTAINTY AROUND THAT
>> AND DON'T KNOW IF THEY EVEN
TIME FRAME.
HAVE ALL OF THE INFORMATION AT
>> AND DON'T KNOW IF THEY EVEN
THIS POINT THAT THEY NEED TO
HAVE ALL OF THE INFORMATION AT
MAKE THAT DETERMINATION.
THIS POINT THAT THEY NEED TO
I THINK IT WOULD BE A REAL
MAKE THAT DETERMINATION.
CHALLENGE TO PUT A TIME TABLE ON
I THINK IT WOULD BE A REAL
A FIX AT THIS POINT.
CHALLENGE TO PUT A TIME TABLE ON
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
A FIX AT THIS POINT.
JOHN ENGATES AND BILL CURTIS
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
JOHN ENGATES AND BILL CURTIS
>> THANK YOU.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Sreenivasan: WE TURN NOW TO
ONE OF THE MORE VEXING ECONOMIC
ISSUES FOR MANY U.S. HOUSEHOLDS-
- THE RISING COSTS OF COLLEGE.
A NEW REPORT FROM THE COLLEGE
BOARD--  THE GROUP THAT OWNS THE
S.A.T. TEST-- FINDS COSTS AT
FOUR-YEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS POSTED
THE SMALLEST INCREASE IN MORE
THAN 30 YEARS: UP 2.9%.
THE BAD NEWS: FEDERAL AID FOR
UNDERGRADUATES DECLINED BY 9%
OVER A TWO-YEAR PERIOD.
RAY SUAREZ TAKES IT FROM HERE.
>> Suarez: JEFF SELINGO WATCHES
ALL OF THIS CLOSELY.
HE'S THE AUTHOR OF "COLLEGE
UNBOUND, THE FUTURE OF HIGHER
EDUCATION AND WHAT IT MEANS FOR
STUDENTS."
AND HE'S A CONTRIBUTING EDITOR
TO THE CHRONICLE OF HIGHER
EDUCATION.
JEFF, JUST TO BE A BUNDANTLY
CLEAR, IT DIDN'T GET CHEAPER TO
GO TO PUBLIC COLLEGE AND
UNIVERSITY IN THE UNITED STATES.
IT JUST GOT MORE EXPENSIVE MORE
SLOWLY.
RIGHT?
>> EXACTLY.
I MEAN, THIS IS A SMALLEST
INCREASE WE'VE SEEN IN A COUPLE
OF DECADEES, BUT OF COURSE
THAT'S ON A LARGER BASE.
SO THE PERCENTAGES SEEM SMALL
BUT WE'RE STILL TALKING ABOUT
SEVERAL HUNDRED DOLLARS ON THE
AVERAGE PUBLIC COLLEGE TUITION
IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> Suarez: PRICES IN THE
ECONOMY WENT UP 1.7% LAST YEAR.
COLLEGE WENT UP 2.9%.
WHAT'S BEEN DRIVING THE MUCH
FASTER INCREASES IN THE COST OF
BUYING A COLLEGE EDUCATION
VERSUS THE COST OF EVERYTHING
ELSE WE BUY?
>> COLLEGES, FIRST OF ALL, ARE,
VERY PERSONNEL HEAVY.
SO IT REQUIRES A LOT OF PEOPLE
TO TEACH AT CLNLZ, AND UNLIKE
MOST OTHER PIECES OF THE
ECONOMY, WHERE TECHNOLOGY HAS
REDUCED THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE YOU
NEED TO PRODUCE A WIDGET TODAY
COMPARED TO 1980, YOU STILL NEED
ONE PROFESSOR TO TEACH 20
STUDENTS, JUST LIKE YOU DID IN
1980.
AND THE OTHER THING IS THAT
COLLEGE COSTS SO MUCH BECAUSE IT
CAN COST SO MUCH.
WE TEND TO HAVE A BELIEF IN THIS
COUNTRY IT'S MORE SOMETHING
COSTS -- JUST LIKE A LUXURY CAR
IT'S BETTER IT MUST BE.
>> Suarez: A-HA, BECAUSE IT
CAN COST SO MUCH.
ARE WE REACHING A CEILING IN
COLLEGE COSTS BECAUSE OF OTHER
PRESSURES IN WANT ECONOMY--
WAGES NOT RISING THAT QUICKLY.
SAVINGS STAGNANT IN MANY
FAMILIES, AND SO ON?
>> I THINK THE WAGE PIECE SAY
BIG PIECE.
WE KNOW THAT SALARIES AND INCOME
IN THE UNITED STATES HAS
BASICALLY BEEN FLAT OR DECLINING
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS.
BACK IN 2001, IT TOOK THE
AVERAGE FAMILY LESS THAN 25% OF
THEIR PAYCHECK TO GO TO COLLEGE.
TODAY IT TAKES 40% OF THEIR
PAYCHECK TO GO TO COLLEGE.
AT SOME POINT FAMILIES ARE GOING
TO SAY WHAT AM I BUYING FOR WHAT
I'M SPENDING ON COLLEGE
EDUCATION?
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THEY WON'T
GO.
IT JUST MEANS THEY'RE GOING TO
LOOK FOR MORE VALUABLE
ALTERNATIVES AND CHEAPER
ALTERNATIVES.
>> Suarez: DOES THAT MEAN THAT
PARENTS AND FAMILY AND STUDENTS,
AS INDIVIDUALS, HAVE A LITTLE
BIT MORE BARGAINING POWER ON
THEIR SIDE OF THE TABLE?
CAN THEY, BY RESISTING THESE
PRICES, STEERING THEMSELVESES TO
CHEAPER PLACES TO BE EDUCATED,
TEMPER SOME OF THESE PRICE
INCREASES?
>> THEY COULD.
IT DEPENDS ON WHERE THEY'RE
GOING.
AT THE TOP SCHOOLS, PROBABLY
NOT.
MOST OF THE TOP SCHOOLS HAVE 10
TIMES AS MANY QUALIFIED
APPLICANTS AS THEY HAVE SPOTS.
BUT AT OTHER SCHOOLS-- AND WE
SEE THIS, THIS SMALL WITH A
NUMBER OF MIDDLE-TIER SCHOOLS
DID NOT HAVE ENOUGH STUDENTS TO
FILL THEIR SEATS.
AT THOSE INSTITUTIONS STUDENTS
HAVE A LOT MORE BARGAINING POWER
THAN THEY DID EVEN A COUPLE OF
YEARS AGO.
A STUDENT IN A SEAT IS BETTER
THAN NO STUDENT IN ONE OF THOSE
SEATS.
>> Suarez: THE HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATION RATES WITH GOING UP.
THIS IS A PRETTY BIG
GENERATIONAL COHORT.
THERE ARE STILL A LOT OF KIDS
LOOKING FOR SEATS IN COLLEGES,
AREN'T THERE?
>> THERE ARE STILL A LOT.
BUT IT DEPENDS WHERE YOU LIVE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF COLLEGES IN
THE MID-AT LANT AND I CAN
NORTHEAST, WHERE HIGH SCHOOL
GRADUATION RATES ARE FALLING
BECAUSE OF DEMOGRAPHICS.
AND THERE ARE NOT AS MANY
COLLEGES IN SOUTH
WHERE THOSE INCREASING.
>> Suarez: AFTER ALL THESE
YEARS OF TUITION INCREASES THAT
WAY OUTSTRIP THE RATE OF
INFLATION ARE WE OPENING UP A
NATIONAL CONVERSATION TO LOOK AT
RADICALLY DIFFERENT WAYS OF
PAYING FOR SCHOOLS, REDUCING
SOME OF THE PRESSURE ON PARENTS
WHO ARE ALSO, AT THE SAME TIME,
TRYING TO SAVE UP FOR THEIR OWN
RETIREMENT.
>> I THINK WE ARE.
PRESIDENT OBAMA PUT A LOT OF
MONEY IN HIS FIRST TERM INTO
HIGHER EDUCATION, AND NOTHING
CHANGED IN TERMS OF COLLEGE
PRICES.
AS YOU MENTIONED, THEY KEPT
GOING UP.
BACK IN AUGUST, HE TOOK THE BUS
TOUR THROUGH NEW YORK AND
PENNSYLVANIA, AND HE BASICALLY
SAID FEDERAL AID CAN'T KEEP
CHASING INCREASING COLLEGE
PRICES.
WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
I THINK WHERE YOU'RE GOING TO
SEE THIS IS ON THE COST SIDE OF
THINGS.
WE ALWAYS TALK ABOUT THE PRICE
BUT NOT THE COST OF DELIVERING
EDUCATION.
WE'RE GOING TO LOOK AT OTHER
WAYS OF DELIVERING THE COURSES,
AND I THINK ON THE OTHER SIDE
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE INCOME-BASED
CONTINGENT LOANS WHERE STUDENTS
CAN PAY A PIECE OF THEIR INCOME
AFTER COLLEGE TOWARD THEIR
LOANS.
SO I THINK ON BOTH SIDES, BOTH
THE COST SIDE AND THE PRICE
SIDE, YOU'RE GOING TO SEE
CHANGES IN WANT FUTURE BECAUSE I
THINK THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
PARTICULARLY IS SAYING WE CAN NO
LONGER KEEP UP WITH THE RISING
PRICES OF COLLEGES.
>> Suarez: THERE ARE EVEN SOME
SUGGESTIONS THAT IT NOT BE FOUR
YEARS ANYMORE, AREN'T THERE?
>> THERE ARE.
AND THERE ARE WAYS OF DOING
THIS.
WE BASE LEARNING ON HOW MUCH
TIMES SOMEBODY SPENDS IN A SEAT.
THERE'S NOTHING MAGICAL ABOUT
FOUR YEARS OF COLLEGE AND 120
CREDITS FOR A BACHELOR'S DEGREE.
WE HAVE NO IDEA IF SOMEBODY
SPENDS 40 YEARS IN COLLEGE IF
THEY LEARN SOMETHING WHILE
THERE.
THERE IS A MOVE TOWARDS
COMPETENCY-BASED EDUCATION,
WHICH IS BASICALLY WHAT DO YOU
KNOW?
IF YOU KNOW IT, YOU MOVE ON, AND
IN SOME CASES YOU CAN FINISH
COLLEGE IN LESS THAN FOUR YEARS.
>> Suarez: AT THE SAME TIME AS
THIS COUNTRY'S NEWS HAS BEEN
DOMINATED BY THE TROUBLES WITH
THE OPENING OF THE HEALTH CARE
EXTINCTION, A LOT OF
COLLEGE-AGED STUDENTS LOOK
TOWING APPLY HAVE FOUND THEY'RE
HAVING PROBLEMS WITH THE COMMON
APP THAT WAS DESIGNED TO MAKE
THINGS EASIER.
THAT'S GOING ON.
>> THIS IS THE APPLICATION WHERE
YOU COULD APPLY TO MULTIPLE
SCHOOLS WITH ONE APPLICATION,
SOME SCHOOLS ADD A FEW THINGS ON
TO THAT.
IT MAKES APPLYING TO COLLEGE
MUCH EASIER.
IT'S WHY MANY STUDENTS NOW APPLY
TO 10 COLLEGES.
WHEN I WENT TO COLLEGE IT WAS
LIKE YOU DIDN'T WANT TO GO MORE
THAN TWO APPLICATIONS BECAUSE IT
WAS A LOT OF WORK.
NOW WHAT'S HAPPENING, IS JUST
LIKE THE HEALTH CARE EXTINCTION,
PEOPLE ARE RUNNING INTO BIG
TECHNOLOGY PROBLEMS BECAUSE OF
CHANGES, THE COMMON APP MADE
THIS YEAR AND A NUMBER OF
SCHOOLS HAVE HAD TO PUSH BACK
THEIR DEADLINES FOR EARLY
APPLICATION AS A RESULT.
>> Suarez: ANY SIGN THIS WILL
BE SOLVED BY THE TIME WE REACH
THE LATE PART OF THIS YEAR, THE
EARLY PART OF NEXT YEAR?
>> YES.
THEY'RE WORKING ON THIS.
THE SCHOOLS ARE REALLY
FRUSTRATED.
THERE ARE ALTERNATIVES, OF
COURSE, WHERE STUDENTS CAN STILL
APPLY KIND OF THE OLD-FASHIONED
WAY.
BUT THIS HAS BEEN DEFINITELY A
BLACK EYE ON THE PART OF THE
COMMON APP.
AND IF I'M A FAMILY APPLYING FOR
HEALTH CARE AND APPLYING FOR
COLLEGE AT THE SAME TIME, I
THINK I PROBABLY WOULD WANT TO
THROW MY COMPUTER OUT THE WINDOW
AT THIS POINT.
>> Suarez: JEFF SELINGO,
"COLLEGE UNBOUND:  THE FUTURE OF
HIGHER EDUCATION AND WHAT IT
MEANS TO STIEWNTSD."
THANKS A LOT.
>> GREAT TO BE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, A PAIR OF
DISPATCHES FROM DETROIT AT AN
IMPORTANT MOMENT, STARTING WITH
A KEY TRIAL OVER THE CITY'S
BANKRUPTCY FILING.
DETROIT'S LEADERS SAY THE CITY
IS $18 BILLION IN DEBT, FORCING
A MOVE TO CHAPTER 9.
BUT THEY ALSO MUST PERSUADE A
JUDGE THE CITY HAS MET ALL OF
THE REQUIREMENTS TO DO SO AND
OPPONENTS SAY THAT'S NOT THE
CASE.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE.
>> Brown: THE TRIAL BEGAN TODAY
IN FEDERAL COURT IN DETROIT.
MATTHEW DOLAN OF THE WALL STREET
JOURNAL WAS THERE AND JOINS ME
NOW TO EXPLAIN WHAT THE
ARGUMENTS ARE ABOUT.
MATTHEW, BEFORE WE GET TO THE
SPECIFICS, THIS TRIAL IS REALLY
TO SEE IF THE CITY IS EVEN
ENTITLED TO GO THROUGH WITH THE
BANKRUPTCY AND WHO'S BRINGING
THE CASE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WELL, WHAT HAPPENED WAS THE CITY
FILED FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
BACK IN JULY.
BUT NOW THEY'RE AT THE STAGE OF
THE TRIAL WHERE THEY ACTUALLY
NEED TO PROVE TO A JUDGE THAT
THE CONDITIONS WERE RIGHT, THAT
THEY SHOULD HAVE BANKRUPTCY
PROTECTION.
SOME OF THOSE CONDITIONS WOULD
INCLUDE WHETHER OR NOT THE CITY
IS TRULY INSOLVE ENTER.
IT ALSO WOULD INCLUDE WHETHER OR
NOT THE CITY HAD STATE
AUTHORIZATION WHEN IT FILED FOR
BANKRUPTCY NEJULY.
AND IT ALSO HAS TO PROVE WHETHER
OR NOT IT TRIED TO ARGUE IN GOOD
FAITH WITH ITS MANY CREDITORS
BEFORE THEY ACTUALLY FILED FOR
BANKRUPTCY.
SO ALL OF THOSE ISSUES ARE
COMING TO A HEAD BEFORE JUDGE
STEVEN RHODES TODAY IN DETROIT
FEDERAL BANKRUPTCY COURT.
>> Brown: TELL US WHO IS
BRINGING THE CASE, WHO IS MAKING
THESE ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE
CITY?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WELL, THE CASE IS, OF COURSE,
BROUGHT BY THE CITY ITSELF.
AND IT'S ACTUALLY UNDER THE
CONTROL OF AN EMERGENCY MANAGER
WHO WAS APPOINTED IN MARCH BY
THE GOVERNOR OF THE STATE WHO
HAD SAID THAT THE CITY'S
FINANCES WERE TOO SHAKY TO BE
RUN ON ITS OWN.
THOSE OPPOSING THE CITY'S
ELIGIBILITY FOR BANKRUPTCY
INCLUDE MUNICIPAL UNIONS,
PENSION FUNDS, AND A GROUP OF
RETIREES, REPRESENTED BY A
COMMITTEE APPOINTED THROUGH THE
JUDGE.
>> Brown: YOU MENTIONED SOME
OF THE ISSUES AT STAKE HERE.
ONE IS WHETHE THE CITY IS IN
US.
WE CERTAINLY HAVE HEARD ABOUT
THE DEBT THAT IT HAS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT SEEMS LIKE SORT OF AN UNUSUAL
TEST FOR A CITY THAT'S FILED FOR
BANKRUPTCY.
THEY'VE SAID THAT THEY'VE GOT
SOME $18 BILLION IN LONG-TERM
LIABILITYS.
WHAT WE HEARD FROM ARGUMENTS
WILL TODAY ON BOTH SIDES IS THAT
THERE MAY BE SOME QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT THAT NUMBER IS
TRULY INDEED THE NUMBER.
AND SO THE UNIONS AND PENSION
FUNDS ARE BEGINNING TO LOOK AT
THE CITY'S BALANCE SHEET AND
ASKING SOME CRITICAL QUESTIONS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IS THE HOLE THAT
APPEARS TO BE IN DETROIT'S
BALANCE SHEET FOR ITS PENSION
OBLIGATIONS TRULY AS DEEPALS THE
CITY SAYS IT IS?
SO BOTH SIDES WILL BE PRESENTING
EVIDENCE THIS WEEK, AND SORT OF
A BACK-AND-FORTH ABOUT WHETHER
OR NOT THE CITY'S FINANCES ARE
REALLY AS DIRE AS THE CITY
ORIGINALLY SAID IT WAS.
>> Brown: AND YOU MENTIONED
PENSIONS A FEW TIMES.
ANOTHER ISSUE, I GATHER, IS
WHETHER THESE PENSIONS ARE IN
FACT PROTECTED UNDER THE STATE'S
CONSTITUTION.
>> THAT'S RIGHT GOING TO BE A
CRITICAL QUESTION FOR THE JUDGE
TO DECIDE.
AND HE MAY NOT DECIDE IT RIGHT
AWAY.
THE UNIONS AND THE PENSION FUNDS
ARE SAYING THAT THE CITY SHOULD
HAVE NEVER BEEN ELIGIBLE TO FILE
FOR BANKRUPTCY BECAUSE THEIR
PLANS ALL ALONG WERE TO CUT THE
PENSIONS, WHICH ARE PROTECT BIDE
THE STATE CONSTITUTION, THEY
SAY.
THE CITY SAYS THAT ONCE THEY
FILED FOR BANKRUPTCY PROTECTION
IN FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, IT IS THE
FEDERAL CONSTITUTION THAT WOULD
SUPERCEDE THE PROTECTIONS UNDER
STATE CONSTITUTION.
SO THIS IS A CASE THAT'S BEING
WATCHED NOT ONLY IN DETROIT BUT
NATIONWIDE AS MANY CITIES AND
STATES ARE STRUGGLING WITH HUGE
PENSION OBLIGATIONS AND
WONDERING CAN THEY CUT THOSE
PENSION OBLIGATION AS THE SOME
POINT IN THE FUTURE OR ARE THERE
PROTECTIONS IN PLACE THAT WOULD
PREVENT THEM FROM DOING SO.
>> Brown: THEN OF COURSE
THERE'S THE ISSUE OF THE
EMERGENCY MANAGER, KEVIN ORR,
WHETHER HIS APPOINT IS
CONSTITUTIONAL, I GATHER, IS ONE
ISSUE.
OR ONCE WHEN HE WAS IN POWER,
WHETHER HE NEGOTIATED IN GOOD
FAITH.
>> THOSE ARE BOTH CRITICAL
ISSUES AND WILL COME TO LIGHT
DURING THE NEXT COUPLE DAYS AND
WEEKS AS THIS TRIAL CONTINUES.
THE EMERGENCY MANAGER LAW IN
MICHIGAN HAS SORT OF A TORTURED
HISTORY.
IT ORIGINALLY WAS ON THE BOOKS
AS A WAY FOR THE GOVERNOR, AS
SORT OF A LAST RESORT, TO
APPOINT A FINANCIAL OVERSEAR
OVER A FISK FISCALLY TROUBLED
CITIES.
BUT VOTERS ACTUALLY, THROUGH A
REFERENDUM PROCESS, DECIDED THEY
WANT TO REPEAL THAT LAW.
THE STATE LEGISLATURE CAME BACK
AND PASSED ANOTHER VERSION OF
THAT LAW, WHICH WOULD BE
PROTECTED FROM ANY KIND OF
REFERENDUM RECALL.
SO THAT LAW IS NOW ON THE
BOOKSES.
BUT NN UNIONS AND OTHERS,
INCLUDING SOME OF THE CIVIL
RIGHTS COMMUNITY HAVE SAID THIS
LAW DISENFRANCHISES VOTERS IN
DISPAEZ GIVES THE STATE TOO MUCH
POWER TO DECIDE WHAT SHOULD BE
LOCAL ISSUES.
SO THIS IS CERTAINLY GOING TO BE
DISCUSSED THROUGHOUT THIS CASE.
AND THE EMERGENCY MANAGER LAW IS
NOT ONLY SOMETHING THAT AFFECTS
DETROIT.
IT AFFECTS SEVERAL CITIES AND
SCHOOL DISTRICTS THROUGHOUT
MICHIGAN.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU
BRIEFLY, FINALLY, YOU'VE
MENTIONWANT GOVERNOR-- WE JUST
TALKED ABOUT KEVIN ORR.
WE'RE EXPECTING TO HEAR FROM
BOTH OF THEM IN THIS TRIAL, I
GATHER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S VERY UNUSUAL BUT BOTH KEVIN
ORR, AND THE GOVERNOR OF
MICHIGAN ARE EXPECTED TO
TESTIFY.
THEY EARLIER GAVE DEPOSITIONS IN
WHICH THEY DESCRIBED THEIR ROLES
WHICH THEY SAY WERE LAWFUL AND
THEY FOLLOWED THE EMERGENCY
MANAGER LAW AND THE SWEEPING
POWERS THAT IT HAS.
THE GOVERNOR HAS ALWAYS SAID
HE'S GONE INTO THIS PROCESS
RELUCTANTLY, HE WAS HOPING
THROUGH A SERIES OF CONSENT
AGREEMENTS AND OTHER MEASURES HE
HAD HOPED TO KEEP DETROIT OUT OF
BANKRUPTCY COURT.
HE AND HIS STAFF ARE PUSHING
FULL STEAM AHEAD SAYING THIS WAS
THE LAST RESORT, BUT IT'S
CERTAINLY A LAWFUL ONE.
>> Brown: MATTHEW DOLAN OF THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> IT'S BEEN MY PLEASURE.
I WAS IN DETROIT RECENTLY
REPORTING ON REBUILDING EFFORTS
THERE.
I ALSO RECORDED ANOTHER CHAPTER
IN THE SERIES I'M DOING WITH
POET LAUREATE NATASHA TRETHEWEY
THAT WE CALL "WHERE POETRY
LIVES".
OUR GOAL: TO EXPLORE POETRY AND
LITERATURE IN VARIOUS CORNERS OF
AMERICAN LIFE, SEEKING TO
CONNECT THESE TRIPS TO ASPECTS
OF NATASHA'S PERSONAL
EXPERIENCE.
HERE'S WHAT WE FOUND IN DETROIT.
>> POETRY IS YOUR WIFE OR
HUSBAND, GOING WITH YOU
EVERYWHERE YOU GO, SLEEPING WITH
YOU EVEN.
>> POETRY LIVES ON YOUR DOORSTEP
LIKE A BABY IN A BASKET WAITING
FOR A NEW FAMILY.
>> Brown: MIDDLE SCHOOL STUDENTS
AT THE MARCUS GARVEY ACADEMY IN
DETROIT, RECITING THE WORK
THEY'D JUST WRITTEN.
TEACHER AND POET PETER MARKUS
OFTEN PROMPTS THE STUDENTS WITH
A QUESTION.
TODAY, HE WORKED OFF OUR THEME,
ASKING: WHERE DOES POETRY LIVE?
>> POEMS LIVE IN STARS, WAITING
TO BE WISHED ON.
>> Brown: IT'S PART OF AN 18-
YEAR-OLD PROGRAM CALLED
"INSIDE/OUT" THAT SENDS
PROFESSIONAL WRITERS INTO
DETROIT'S SCHOOLS-- THIS YEAR
SOME 25 WRITERS INTO 27 SCHOOLS.
WHEN NATASHA TRETHEWEY AND I
ARRIVED AT MARCUS GARVEY
RECENTLY, SHE RECALLED HER OWN
INTRODUCTION TO POETRY IN THE
THIRD GRADE.
>> I WAS WRITING POETRY.
AND THE LIBRARIAN IN MY SCHOOL
TOOK A GROUP OF MY POEMS AND
BOUND THEM AND PUT THEM IN THE
LIBRARY.
>> Brown: AH, A PUBLISHED POET?
>> AT THIRD GRADE.
( LAUGHS )
>> THESE QUESTIONS THAT I ASK
YOU, IS THERE ONLY ONE RIGHT
ANSWER?
>> NO.
>> Brown: INSIDE/OUT ALSO TURNS
ITS STUDENTS INTO PUBLISHED
POETS, PART OF CREATING A SENSE
OF AUTHORSHIP AND VOICE THAT
PETER MARKUS SAYS THE PROGRAM
AIMS FOR.
>> NUMBER ONE, I WANT TO BUILD
CONFIDENCE WITH A PENCIL IN THE
HAND, MORE THAN ANYTHING ELSE.
A LOT OF TIMES I'LL COME INTO A
CLASSROOM AND I CAN JUST TELL
THAT EARLY ON A CHILD DOESN'T
LIKE TO WRITE.
OR FEELS, OH, I DON'T, I'M NOT A
GOOD WRITER, OR I DON'T KNOW
WHAT A POEM IS.
AND THEN AS SOON AS I CAN, I
WANT TO SORT OF DISABLE THEM
FROM THAT KIND OF THINKING AND
SAYING, SURE YOU CAN.
YOU JUST WROTE A POEM.
>> Brown: MARK IS USUNAFRAID TO
BRING IN SOPHISTICATED WORKS BY
MAJOR POETS-- ON OUR VISIT, FOR
EXAMPLE, HE USED A POEM BY W.S.
MERWIN.
>> WE KNOW THAT OUR PENCILS ARE
MORE THAN OUR PENCILS.
THERE ARE WORDS HIDING INSIDE OF
THEM.
REMEMBER THAT POEM?
WHAT ARE THE WORDS DOING IN
MERWIN'S POEM?
>> THEY'RE WAITING TO BE
WRITTEN.
>> Brown: THE PROGRAM, OF
COURSE, CAN'T BE SEPARATED FROM
THE CITY-- THE VERY TROUBLED
CITY-- IN WHICH IT OPERATES.
THE SHRINKING OF DETROIT'S
POPULATION AND ITS FINANCIAL
CRISIS HAVE LED TO THE CLOSING
OF MORE THAN 100 SCHOOLS.
AND WHILE THERE ARE SOME SIGNS
OF GROWTH AND BUILDING IN
DETROIT THESE DAYS, AREAS OF
TREMENDOUS BLIGHT AND POVERTY
REMAIN, INCLUDING IN THE AREA
AROUND MARCUS GARVEY.
JAMES HEARN IS THE SCHOOL'S
PRINCIPAL.
>> THE NEIGHBORHOOD IS A HIGH
POVERTY ENVIRONMENT, SINGLE
PARENT HOMES, REALLY A LOT OF
CRIME, LOW SOCIO-ECONOMIC AREA.
>> Brown: SO WHAT'S THE SCHOOL
BECOME THEN?
>> IT BECOMES THE HAVEN.
IT BECOMES AN OASIS IN THE
DESERT.
>> Brown: ONE THING PRINCIPAL
HEARN NEVER IMAGINED AS PART OF
ALL THIS WAS POETRY.
HE SAYS HE WAS FLABBERGASTED
WHEN INSIDE/OUT FIRST CAME TO
HIM.
>> IT WAS UNBELIEVABLE.
WE HAVE SO MANY NEEDS FOR OUR
KIDS AND TO HAVE POETRY AS AN
ALTERNATIVE-- I THOUGHT TO
MYSELF, "WAIT A MINUTE, WORK
WITH POETRY!"
>> Brown: DID YOU KNOW MUCH
ABOUT POETRY YOURSELF?
>> NO, NOT AT ALL.
VERY LITTLE ABOUT IT.
BUT WHEN I SAW THE KIDS PRODUCE
A BOOK AT THE END OF THIS
PARTICULAR EXPERIENCE AND THEY
COULD TAKE IT HOME AND THE PRIDE
THOSE KIDS HAVE, THAT'S
OUTSTANDING.
YOU KNOW, THAT REALLY WON ME
OVER.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU SEE THEM
GETTING OUT OF IT?
>> LOVE OF WRITING, THAT'S
THIS POETRY REALLY GETS THEM
TRULY MOTIVATED AND EXCITED.
AND I'M TALKING ABOUT MY
FOOTBALL PLAYERS, MY ATHLETES,
MY BASKETBALL PLAYERS WANT
POETRY.
>> Brown: REALLY?
>> REALLY.
>> Brown: I MEAN, YOU'RE SAYING
THAT SMILING.
YOU'RE SURPRISED.
>> I'M SURPRISED.
>> Brown: NATASHA AND I HAD THE
CHANCE TO TALK TO THREE OF THE
CHILDREN AFTER THEIR CLASS: 12
YEAR OLDS EDDIE STEWART AND
QUINTIN POPE AND 11-YEAR-OLD
RICKI PORTER.
>> SO IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU'RE
WRITING FROM MEMORIES, YOU'RE
ALSO WRITING ABOUT YOUR
EXPERIENCES.
WHAT KINDS OF THINGS HAVE YOU
WRITTEN ABOUT?
>> THE THINGS I'VE WRITTEN ABOUT
WAS WHEN I WAS IN KINDERGARTEN,
ABOUT WHEN IT WAS MY BIRTHDAY
AND I CRIED ON MY BIRTHDAY.
I WROTE ABOUT EMBARRASSING
TIMES, I WROTE ABOUT FUNNY
TIMES, I WROTE ABOUT A LOT OF
THINGS THAT HAPPENED.
>> I DON'T REALLY THINK IT'S
HARD TO WRITE POEMS LIKE THIS.
REALLY YOU JUST LET YOUR
IMAGINATION RUN FREE AND YOU
JUST WRITE.
>> Brown: IT JUST COMES OUT?
>> YES, THAT'S MY WAY OF SAYING
IT.
I DIDN'T LIKE TO WRITE BEFORE
THIS CLASS.
WHAT I LEARNED THAT IT'S OKAY TO
EXPERIENCE PERSONAL STUFF WHEN
YOU, WHEN YOU WRITE.
SO THAT'S WHY I STARTED TO LIKE
POETRY AND I LIKE THIS CLASS
BECAUSE I DON'T USUALLY WRITE
AND THIS GIVES ME A LOT OF TIME
TO DO WHAT I LIKE TO DO.
AND I LOVE TO WRITE.
>> Brown: QUINTIN TOLD US HE
WANTED TO MAKE SURE EACH LINE IS
A DEEP THOUGHT.
>> THE DEEP, DEEP THOUGHTS THAT
I PUT IN MY POEMS ARE NOT ABOUT
ME, IT'S ABOUT WHAT AFFECTS
EVERYBODY ELSE, NOT JUST ME.
>> Brown: WHAT KINDS OF THINGS?
>> LIKE I WOULD SAY "MY POEM IS
I WOULD SAY, "MY POEM IS A
MONSTER SCARING YOU TILL THE
LIGHTS ARE ON."
SO WHEN I BEEN SCARED OR HAD A
NIGHTMARE AND TURNED THE LIGHTS
ON, TILL SOMEONE WAS THERE FOR
ME.
>> Brown: THAT EVER HAPPEN TO
YOU?
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: AFTERWARDS, I ASKED
NATASHA WHAT HAD STRUCK HER
MOST.
>> IT WAS A SENSE OF POWER THAT
THEY HAVE FROM BEING ABLE TO
IMAGINE, TO CREATE, TO NAME
THEMSELVES, TO SPEAK FOR
THEMSELVES-- AS THE CREED SAYS,
IT DID REMIND ME OF BEING IN MY
SCHOOL AND LEARNING THE WORK OF
POETS, AFRICAN-AMERICAN POETS,
THAT I'VE CARRIED WITH ME SINCE
THEN.
AND I CARRIED IT WITH ME LATER
ON, PARTICULARLY WHEN I WAS
BUSSED LATER ON INTO A WHITE
SCHOOL IN EIGHT GRADE.
ONE OF THE POEMS THAT
PARTICULARLY STRUCK ME WAS
LANGSTON HUGHES' "I TOO SING
AMERICA."
AND GOING TO THAT SCHOOL, WHERE
PEOPLE DIDN'T WANT US, I COULD
BE ARMED WITH THAT POEM, "I TOO
SING AMERICA", AND IT WAS LIKE A
FORCE FIELD AROUND ME.
>> Brown: YOU SAW A LITTLE OF
THAT HERE TODAY.
>> I SAW A LOT OF THAT TODAY.
>> Brown: TERRY BLACKHAWK, A
WRITER AND FORMER TEACHER WHO
FOUNDED INSIDE/OUT, SAYS
EVALUATIONS OF THE PROGRAM HAVE
DOCUMENTED IMPROVED WRITING
SKILLS BY PARTICIPANTS.
SHE ALSO SEES A LARGE CIVIC
ROLE.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO REVIVE OUR
CITY, NOT JUST IN THE CULTURAL
CENTERS, BUT NEIGHBORHOOD BY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
AND I THINK THAT EVERY SCHOOL
NEEDS A POET, BECAUSE THIS POET
CAN HELP THE SCHOOL AND THE
CHILDREN GIVE VOICE TO THEIR
LIVES.
AND YOU CAN ALSO BUILD
CONNECTIONS IN THE COMMUNITY AT
LARGE.
SO WE HAVE PARENT WRITING
WORKSHOPS.
WE HAVE WAYS OF BRINGING THE
COMMUNITY INTO THE SCHOOL.
>> "WELCOME TO MY CITY
BEAUTY ISN'T OBVIOUS
BUT ANGERS BEATS AT OUR FRONT
DOORS
LIKE POLICE GIVING A LAST
WARNING..."
>> Brown: THAT NIGHT, INSIDE/OUT
HELD A PUBLIC READING THAT
FEATURED SEVERAL OF ITS ALUMNI,
INCLUDING JUSTIN ROGERS, NOW A
STUDENT AT WAYNE STATE.
HIS POEM, "SMALL TOWN CITY", WAS
A PORTRAIT IN WORDS OF THE
PLIGHT OF HIS HOMETOWN.
>> "I AM ONE OF THE FAITHFUL
CITIZENS
ROOTED LIKE FLAG POLES
WRITING LOVE POEMS TO MY CITY
NO MATTER HOW MANY
DARK ALLEYS WE TREAD THROUGH
OR POTHOLES WE SWIM IN."
I WAS TRYING TO TOUCH ON REALLY
SPECIFIC SITUATIONS THAT PEOPLE
ENCOUNTER ON A REGULAR BASIS.
I LOOKED AT WHAT MY CITY IS NOW
AND REALIZED I ENJOY WHAT I HAVE
HERE, MORE THAN WHAT MY FANTASY
CITY IS.
AND THAT THESE NEGATIVE THINGS,
THEY ARE THERE, BUT THERE ARE SO
MANY OTHER POSITIVE THINGS.
I'M GOING TO ENJOY WHAT I HAVE
HERE.
>> Brown: IT WAS A POSITIVE
MOMENT IN A CITY THAT CAN USE
THEM, LED BY POETRY BRINGING, AS
YOUNG QUINTIN POPE HAD PUT IT,
"THE DEEP THOUGHTS FROM THE
INSIDE, OUT."
>> Sreenivasan: ONLINE WE HAVE
MUCH MORE, INCLUDING A POET'S
NOTEBOOK FROM NATASHA TRETHAWAY,
AND VIDEO OF INSIDE-OUT ALUMNI
RECITING THEIR WORK.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, TO THE
WEST COAST WHERE ALGAE HAS BEEN
POISONING SHELLFISH AND
SUBSEQUENTLY PEOPLE.
IN RECENT YEARS, TOXIC ALGAL
BLOOMS HAVE BEEN MORE POTENT AND
LASTED LONGER.
THAT HAS SCIENTISTS TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND WHETHER CLIMATE
CHANGE COULD BE CONTRIBUTING TO
THE PROBLEM.
OUR REPORT COMES FROM SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KATIE CAMPBELL OF
KCTS SEATTLE.
SHE WORKS FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PUBLIC MEDIA PROJECT,
EARTHFIX.
>> Reporter: EVERY FAMILY HAS
ITS LEGENDS.
FOR JOHN AND JACKI WILLIFORD AND
THEIR CHILDREN, ITS THE STORY OF
A MISERABLE CAMPING TRIP ON THE
OLYMPIC PENINSULA IN THE SUMMER
OF 2011.
IT ALL STARTED WHEN THE
WILLIFORDS DID WHAT MANY
FAMILIES IN THE NORTHWEST DO ON
COASTAL CAMPING TRIPS.
THEY HARVESTED SOME SHELLFISH
AND COOKED THEM UP WITH SOME
GARLIC AND OREGANO.
>> OH, THEY WERE AMAZING.
I WAS LIKE, "WOW, THESE ARE
PRETTY MUCH THE BEST MUSSELS
I'VE EVER EATEN.
>> THEY WERE THE BEST MUSSELS IN
THE WHOLE WIDE RLD.WO
>> Reporter: T-YEAWOR-OLD
JESSICA AND FIVE-YEAR-OLD JAYCEE
WERE THE FIRST TO GET SICK.
NEXT JOHN GOT SICK.
>> TY JUHEST WERE SO VIOLENTLY
ILL I JUST KNEW IT HAD TO BE THE
MUSSELS.
SO THAT NEXT WEEK I CALLED THE
HEALTH DEPT AND SAID I THINK WE
GOT SHELLFISH POISONING OR
SOMETHING FROM THE SHELLFISH.
AND THAT'S WHEN ALL THE CALLS
STARTED TO COME IN.
>> Reporter: IT TURNED OUT THAT
WILLIFORDS WERE THE FIRST
CONFIRMED CASE IN THE UNITED
STATES OF PEOPLE GETTING
DIARRHETIC SHELLFISH POISONING.
D.S.P. COMES FROM EATING
SHELLFISH CONTAMINATED BY A
TOXIN PRODUCED BY A TYPE OF
ALGAE CALLED DINOPHYSIS.
DINOPHYSIS HAS BEEN FOUND AROUND
IT'S BEEN FOUND IN NORTHWEST
WATERS FOR DECADES, BUT NOT AT
LEVELS CONSIDERED TOXIC.
>> IT'S UNFORTUNATE TO DISCOVER
THAT YOU HAVE A NEW TOXIN
PRESENT BY PEOPLE GETTING ILL.
>> Reporter: NEIL HARRINGTON IS
AN ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGIST FOR
THE JAMESTOWN SKLALLAM TRIBE IN
SEQUIM, WASH.
EVERY WEEK HE COLLECTS WATER AND
SHELLFISH SAMPLES FROM THE SAME
BAY WHERE THE WILLIFORDS
HARVESTED MUSSELS TWO SUMMERS
AGO.
HE TESTS FOR DINOPHYSIS AND
OTHER NATURALLY OCCURRING TOXINS
IN SHELLFISH.
>> SHELLFISH ARE FILTER FEEDERS
SO THEY ARE FILTERING LITERS AND
LITERS OF WATER EVERY DAY, IF
THEY ARE FILTERING PHYTOPLANTON
THAT IS A LITTLE BIT TOXIC,
WHEN WE EAT THE SHELLFISH, WE'RE
EATING ESSENTIALLY THAT TOXIN
THAT'S BEEN CONCENTRATED OVER
TIME BY THE SHELLFISH.
>> Reporter: A NUMBER OF FACTORS
CAN INCREASE THE SIZE AND
SEVERITY OF HARMFUL ALGAL
BLOOMS.
AS MORE LAND IS DEVELOPED, MORE
FERTILIZERS AND NUTRIENTS GET
WASHED INTO WATERWAYS.
IT'S A PROBLEM THAT HAS ITH
FLORIDA AND THE GULF OF MEXICO
AS WELL.
>> THE MORE NUTRIENTS YOU ADD TO
A WATER BODY, THE MORE ALGAE
THERE IS AND THE MORE CHANCE
THAT SOME OF THOSE ALGAE COULD
BE HARMFUL.
>> Reporter: BUT ON TOP THE
LOCAL PROBLEM OF NUTRIENT RUNOFF
IS THE LARGER ISSUE OF GLOBAL
WARMING.
SCIENTISTS BELIEVE THE INCREASE
IN PREVALENCE AND TOXICITY OF
DINOPHYSIS IS LINKED TO CHANGING
OCEAN CHEMISTRY AND WARMING
WATERS.
>> THERE'S A WHOLE LOT OF
CHANGES THAT ARE OCCURRING IN
PUGET SOUND AND THEY'RE NOT
OCCURRING IN ISOLATION AND
THAT'S THE CHALLENGE FOR
SCIENTISTS AND PEOPLE DOING
>> Reporter: STEPHANIE MOORE IS
A BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHER FOR
THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND
ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION.
SHE STUDIES PUGET SOUNDS HARMFUL
ALGAE.
MOST ALGAL BLOOMS HERE OCCUR
DURING WARMER WEATHER.
BECAUSE CLIMATE CHANGE IS
EXPECTED TO RAISE TEMPERATURES
IN THE COMING DECADES, MOORE
SAYS THAT COULD DIRECTLY AFFECT
WHEN AND WHERE HARMFUL ALGAL
BLOOMS OCCUR.
>> WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO LOOK
FOR THESE BLOOMS IN PLACES AND
DURING TIMES OF THE YEAR WHEN
TRADITIONALLY WE HAVEN'T HAD TO
WORRY ABOUT THEM.
THEIR IMPACTS COULD THEN SPAN A
MUCH LARGER TIME OF THE YEAR AND
THAT COULD COST A LOT MORE MONEY
IN TERMS OF THE EFFORT THAT
NEEDS TO GO INTO MONITORING AND
PROTECTING THE PUBLIC FROM THE
TOXINS THAT THEY PRODUCE.
WASHINGTON HAS ONE OF THE MOST
ADVANCED AND COMPREHENSIVE ALGAE
MONITORING AND SHELLFISH TESTING
SYSTEMS IN THE COUNTRY.
IT'S IN PART BECAUSE OF THE
STATE'S 800 MILES OF SHORE AND
MULTIMILLION DOLLAR SHELLFISH
INDUSTRY.
TODAY MOORE IS TESTING A NEW
PIECE OF EQUIPMENT THAT HAS THE
POTENTIAL TO RAISE THE BAR EVEN
HIGHER.
THIS ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLE
PROCESSOR, OR E.S.P.,
AUTOMATICALLY COLLECTS WATER
FROM A NEARBY SHELLFISH BED,
ANALYZES THE SAMPLES AND SENDS
MOORE A PHOTOGRAPH OF THE
RESULTS.
SO THIS IS A HUGE ADVANCEMENT IN
OUR ABILITY TO KEEP TABS ON
WHAT'S GOING ON.
AND IN NEAR REAL TIME.
>> Reporter: MOORE SAYS SHE
HOPES THAT NEXT YEAR THE ESP
WILL BE EQUIPPED TO MONITOR FOR
DINOPHYSIS-- THE TOXIN THAT
CAUSED THE WILLIFORD FAMILY TO
GET SICK.
IN THE MEANTIME, JACKI WILLIFORD
SAYS SHE'LL CONTINUE TO BE
EXTREMELY WARY OF EATING
SHELLFISH.
>> I THINK IT'S SCARY BECAUSE
YOU JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU'RE
GETTING ANYMORE IN FOODS.
>> Reporter: AS FOR THE REST OF
THE FAMILY-- WELL, NOT EVERYONE
HAS SWORN OFF MUSSELS.
>> IT DOESN'T CHANGE A THING FOR
ME.
>> Sreenivasan: J.C. MIGHT KEEP
EATING MUSSELS, BUT THE HIGH
LEVELS OF TOXINS HAVE FORCED THE
WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH TO SHUTDOWN SHELLFISH
BEDS IN SIX COUNTIES AROUND THE
PUGET SOUND.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT:
THE SPIRITUAL NOURISHING OF THE
PRESIDENT.
THAT'S THE FOCUS OF THE NEW BOOK
BY THE MAN "TIME" MAGAZINE
DUBBED THE "PASTOR IN CHIEF."
JOSHUA DUBOIS, THE FORMER HEAD
OF THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE OF
FAITH-BASED AND NEIGHBORHOOD
PARTNERSHIPS HAS PENNED "THE
PRESIDENT'S DEVOTIONAL: THE
DAILY READINGS THAT INSPIRED
PRESIDENT OBAMA".
GWEN IFILL SPOKE WITH DUBOIS
RECENTLY, AND HAS OUR BOOK
CONVERSATION.
>> JOSHUA DUBOIS YOU WRITE THAT
GOD STILL SURPRISE.
HOW MUCH OF A SURPRISE WAS IT
THAT YOU ENDED UP AT THE WHITE
HOUSE?
>> I WAS HUGELY SPRIEDED.
I WAS A POLITICAL CAMPAIGNER.
ONE DAY I GOT A SENTENCE OF MY
SPIRIT.
HE HAS POLICY ADVISERS AND
POLITICAL SUPPORTS AND EVEN
SECRET SERVICE PROTECTION, BUT
WHO'S LOOKING AFTER HIS SOUL?
SO I DECIDED TO TAKE A BIG RISK
AND SENT HIM AN E-MAIL TO HIS
BLACKBERRY-- I DIDN'T KNOW IF I
WAS GOING TO GET FIRED WHEN I
DID THAT-- BUT I SHOT HIM A NOTE
ABOUT THE 23rd PSALM, AND
HOW TO FIND RESTORATION AND REST
IN THE MIDDLE OF TROUBLE.
AND I WAS WAITING FAIR RESPONSE,
AND IN A FEW MINUTES HE WROTE
BACK AND SAID IT WAS EXACTLY
WHAT HE NEEDED.
I JUST KIND OF JUMPED OUT THERE.
>> Ifill: THERE ARE 365
DEVOTIONALS IN THIS BOOK, ONE
FOR EVERY DAY OF THE YEAR.
ONE OF THE THINGS YOU WRITE
ABOUT AT SOME POINT IS HOW THE
PRESIDENT WOULD CALL YOU AND
SAY, "I NEED A PIECE OF
SCRIPTURE FOR SUCH AND SUCH."
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Ifill: AND YOU WOULD HAVE
TO JUST COME UP WITH ONE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE FIRST TIME THAT HAPPENED I
WAS CAUGHT OFF GUARD A BIT.
HE WAS GIVING A SPEECH ON THE
GENOCIDE IN DARFUR, AND I GOT A
CALL FROM A NUMBER I DIDN'T
RECOGNIZE AND HAD TO COME UP
WITH SOME SCRIPTURE.
OVER TIME I LEARNED TO BE READY,
BOTH IN THE POSITIVE MOMENTS AND
ALSO SOME TRYING TIMES AS WELL,
LIKE THE SCRIPTURE HE USES TO
COMFORT A NATION AFTER A
TRAGEDY.
IT WAS REALLY GREAT WORKING WITH
HIM ON THOSE THINGS.
>> Ifill: YOU KNOW, THE
PRESIDENT DOESN'T TALK THAT MUCH
ABOUT HIS FAITH, AT LEAST NOT IN
FRONT OF PUBLIC AUDIENCES, AND I
WONDER IF THAT'S A BALANCE YOU
HAVE TO STRIKE.
>> I WOULD RATHER HAVE A LEADER
WHO LIVESAVE SERMON INSTEAD OF
PREACHES ONE, AND I I BELIEVE HE
SEEKS TO LIVE OUT HIS FAITH IN A
LOT OF DIFFERENT WAYS-- THE WAY
HE'S A FATHER AND HUSBAND AND
THE QUIET WAY HE SEEKS TO
MAINTAIN HIS INTEGRITY AND
CHARACTER PUT HE READS
DEVOTIONALS AND PRAISE WITH
PASTORS IN THE OVAL OFFICE.
HE DOES A PRAYER CALL EVERY YEAR
ON HIS BIRTHDAY.
>> Ifill: EVERY NOW AND THEN
YOU HAD TO BE IN A POSITION,
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU WORKED IN
THE WHITE HOUSE, OF BEING THERE
FOR THE BAD NEWS, TOO, EVEN
DURING THE CAMPAIGN WITH HIS
PAST OREVEREND WRIGHT, IT
EMERGED HE HAD SAID SOME VERY
HARSH THINGS FROM THE PULPIT IN
CHICAGO, AND HAD TO COME UP WAY
SOLUTION OR A WAY TO SPEAK TO
THAT.
>> I TALK ABOUT THIS IN THE
BOOK.
IT WAS A VERY, VERY DIFFICULT
MOMENT.
BUT IT WAS ALSO A TIME I WAS
ABLE TO SEE THE PRESIDENT'S
INTEGRITY.
I THOUGHT HE ADDRESSED SOME
REALLY TOUGH ISSUES OF RACE HEAD
ON IN HIS SPEECH IN
PHILADELPHIA.
AND TRIED TO GET THE COUNTRY TO
THINK ABOUT SOME THINGS WE
ACTUALLY HAVEN'T TALKED ABOUT IN
A FULL WAY, IN A VERY LONG TIME.
SO IT WAS A TOUGH ISSUE.
I SORT OF WALK THROUGH IN THE
BOOK WHAT THAT WAS LIKE.
WE EVENTUALLY MADE IT TO THE
OTHER SIDE.
>> Ifill: ON THE OTHER HAND,
THE WHITE HOUSE IS ALSO A
POLITICAL ENVIRONMENT.
YOU WOULD RUN HEAD UP AGAINST
SOME POLITICAL IMPERATIVES, FOR
INSTANCE, THE CONSCIENCE CLAUSE
IN THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
YOU FELT VERY STRONGLY THAT
CHURCHES ALL THE TO NOT HAVE TO
PAY INTO A SYSTEM THEY THEY
DIDN'T BELIEVE IN.
BUT YOU LOST THAT FIGHT.
>> I DID, BUT, YOU KNOW, THE
ILLUMINATING THING ABOUT THAT
WHOLE ISSUE-- IT'S SOMETHING I
WALK THROUGH IN AN ESSAY IN THE
BOOK WAS NOT THE POLICY
DISAGREEMENT-- YES I HAD A
DISAGREEMENT WITH SOME
COLLEAGUES ABOUT THE POLICY--
BUT I APPROACHED THE RELATIONAL
ASPECT OF THAT ISSUE IN A
WRONG-HEAD WAY.
I STARTED DEMONIZING MY
OPPONENTS AND QUESTIONING THEIR
MOTIVES.
WHAT I WALK THROUGH IN THE WORK
SIBEGAN TO UNPACK THAT AND
REALIZE PEOPLE CAN HAVE SINCERE
DISDIS AGREEMENTS WITH ME BUT
STILL GOOD PEOPLE THAT GOD
LOVES.
>> Ifill: EVEN IF ULTIMATELY
THE PERSON YOU DISAGREE WITH IS
THE PRESIDENT?
>> I'M NOT SURE I DISAGREED HIM.
I THINK THERE WAS A LOT OF
COMPLEXITY TO THE VARIOUS
SOLUTIONS THROUGHOUT AND I THINK
THE WHITE HOUSE ENDED UP IN THE
RIGHT PLACE, BALANCING THE
RIGHTS OF WOMEN WITH THE RIGHTS
OF RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.
IF THERE WAS SOME DISAGREEMENT,
I KNOW IT'S NOT ON
QUESTION OTHERS' MOTIVE MOTIVESD
THAT'S NOT PLACE I WAS IN AT
FIRST.
>> Ifill: TELL US WHAT
HAPPENED WHEN YOU WENT TO
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT, WITH THE
PRESIDENT.
THAT WAS CERTAINLY A STRESSFUL
TIME WHEN ONE WOULD THINK YOU
HAD TO RELY ON YOUR FAITH TO GET
THROUGH IT LOOKING AT THE FACES
OF THOSE PARENTS.
>> IT WAS ABSOLUTELY
DEVASTATING.
I GOT THE CALL ON SATURDAY THAT
THE PRESIDENT WANTED ME TO GO
WITH HIM TO NEWTOWN TO VISIT
WITH THE FAMILIES AFTER THE THE
HORRIBLEIDATE FRIDAY BEFORE.
I WAS JUST IN THESE CLASSROOMS M
WITH HUNDREDS OF PEEMS-- MOTHERS
AND FATHERS AND LITTLE BROTHERS
AND SISTERS WHO JUST A FEW DAYS
BEFORE HAD SENT THEIR LITTLE
ONES OFF TO FIRST GRADE OR
SECOND GRADE, EXPECTING THEM TO
COME HOME, AND THEY NEVER DID.
AND TO SEE THE PRESIDENT GIVE
EACH INDIVIDUAL FULL MEASURE OF
SUPPORT AND CARE, AND HAVE TO
LOOK FATHERS IN THE EYES HOLDING
UP THE PICTURE OF THEIR DAUGHTER
OR SON, TALKING TO LITTLE AND
BROTHER AND SISTERS WHO WOULD
NEVER SEE THEIR BIG BROTHER OR
SISTER AGAIN WAS DEVASTATING.
BUT IT WAS ALSO A MOMENT I SAW
THE PRESIDENT BECOME A PASTOR IN
SOME WAYS.
>> Ifill: THIS IS ONE OF THESE
SITUATION WHERE'S WE KNOW IN
LIFE YOU'RE NOT SUPPOSED TO MIX
RELIGION AND POLITICS AND YET
UPPER IN A POSITION WHERE YOU
KIND OF HAD TO DO BOTH.
>> I COULD NOT HELP IN THOSE
MOMENTS, JUST GOING IN THOSE
ROOMS, AND PRAYING OVER THOSE
FOLKS AND SPEAKING WORDS OF THE
SCRIPTEDDURE OF MY FAITH IN
THOSE SPACES, AND THAT'S NOT TO
IMPOSE IT ON ANYONE ELSE, BUT
THAT'S WHAT I RELIED ON IN THOSE
MOMENTS.
>> Ifill: HOW DID YOU GET
PERMISSION TO PUBLISH THIS?
THOSE WERE PRIVATE MOMENTS.
>> I HAD BEEN SENDING THEM TO
THE PRESIDENT FOR YEARS.
I HAD THOUSANDSES OF THEM FOR
OVER SIX YEARS NOW EVERY DAY,
AND I JUST TALKED WITH HIM, AND
HE AGREED THAT IF THESE HAD BEEN
USEFUL TO HIM IN STARTING HIS
DAY ON THE RIGHT POINT AND
LEARNING HOW TO LOVE GOD BETTER
AND BEGIN EACH DAY WITH JOY
MAYBE THEY WOULD BE USEFUL TO
OTHER FOLKS.
HE HAD NO PROBLEM WITH IT AT ALL
DISPLIEFL IT'S NOT ALL BIBLICAL.
YOU INVOKE JOHNNY CASE, AND YOU
NAME IT.
I WOULD LIKE TO END BY HAVING
YOU READ JUST THIS ONE
INTERESTING PASSAGE.
>> YEAH, THIS IS FROM APRIL 23,
AND IT'S CALLED "OUTWARD."
A PRAYER FOR PERSPECTIVE.
DEAR GOD, LET ME LIFT MY HEAD
OFF MY OWN CHEST, AND FOCUS ON
THE OTHER.
MY FAMILY, MY LOVED ONES, MY
FRIENDS, MY NEIGHBORS, MY
ENEMIES, THOSE LOOSELY CONNECTED
TO ME HALFWAY ACROSS THE WORLD.
THESE EYES OF MINE ARE SO
FREQUENTLY FOCUSED INWARD.
DEAR LORD, TODAY, TURN THEM OUT
AND SHE GIVE ME VISION TO SEE
THE NEEDS OF OTHERS, OTHER THAN
MY PONE.
AMEN.
>> Ifill: AMEN.
JOSHUA DUBOIS, AUTHOR OF "THE
PRESIDENT'S DEVOTIONAL."
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> IT'S A PLEASURE THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
REPUBLICANS PRESSED FOR
INVESTIGATION AMID THE TROUBLES
HEALTH CARE WEB SITE.
AND GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA
MERKEL TELEPHONED PRESIDENT
OBAMA TO COMPLAIN ABOUT ALLEGED
U.S. INTERCEPTS OF HER CELL
PHONE CALLS.
A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN DENIED
SUCH SPYING IS CURRENTLY UNDER
WAY.
A FEDERAL JURY IN NEW YORK
CONVICTED.
ONLINE, WHAT'S IN A NAME?
IN THEORETICAL PHYSICS,
NOMENCLATURE, WHILE SOMEWHAT
ARBITRARY, CAN BE KEY TO
LAUNCHING AN OBSCURE IDEA INTO
POPULAR CULTURE.
IT MIGHT EVEN MAKE A BIG BANG.
READ MORE ON OUR SCIENCE PAGE.
AND JOIN US TOMORROW FOR OUR
WEEKLY TWITTER CHAT.
WE'RE ASKING: "WHAT'S YOUR
DEFINITION OF THE AMERICAN
DREAM?
WE START AT 1:00 P.M. EASTERN
TIME, USING THE #NEWSHOURCHATS.
DETAILS ARE ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE "NEWSHOUR" FOR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, THE CONTRACTORS
BEHIND healthcare.gov FACE TOUGH
QUESTIONS ON CAPITOL HILL.
PLUS, JUDY WOODRUFF SITS DOWN
WITH THE NEW HEAD OF THE E.P.A.,
GINA McCARTHY
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
NEWSHOUR," THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.